Learning Latin
==============

    This is a partial translation of the beginning of Ælfric's *Excerptiones de arte grammatica anglice* ('Extracts on
    Grammar in English'). I find this piece particularly interesting because it includes a discussion on how to
    pronounce the letters which is interesting to a speaker of Modern English. For example, *x* and *r* are said to be
    pronounced 'ix' and 'er' rather than the Modern English 'ex' and 'ar'. Secondly, the foreword speaks to us today
    about the importance of education and learning and has a tantalising glimpse of the reformation of English education
    introduced by King Ælfred.

Foreword
--------

I, Ælfric, decided to write in the English language this small volume about the literacy skill known as *grammatica*
after I translated two books containing eighty homilies since good literacy is the key to unlocking the meaning of those
books. And I thought that this book might benefit young children at the start of their studies until they have reached
greater understanding. It is desirable that each man, if he has any skill, make it useful to others and entrust to them
the talents which God has entrusted to him, lest he let God's wealth lay idle and he be called a wicked servant and that
he be bound and thrown into darkness, just as the holy gospel says. It befits the young man that he learn some wisdom
and it is right for the old to teach understanding to the young, for it is through teaching that faith is maintained.
And each man who loves wisdom is blessed and if he neither learns nor teaches if he may, he diminishes his understanding
and moves little by little from God. From where shall arise learned teachers for God's people unless he teaches the
young? And how may faith be advanced if teaching and teachers fall away?

Now therefore God's servants and monks are earnestly cautioned that the holy teaching not wane nor diminish, just as it
did for the Anglicans a few years ago, when no English priest could compose or explicate a letter in Latin until
archbishop Dunstan and bishop Aðelwold established teaching once more as part of monastic life. I do not claim that this
book will help many to great learning, but nevertheless it may give some understanding of both languages if it is
of use to anyone. I ask now in God's name that if you have this book copied, that you correct it from the exemplar,
for I have no control over errors that may be introduced by unreliable scribes and inaccuracies are their responsibility
and not mine. Much evil does the bad copyist do should he introduce error.

De littera
----------

*Littera* means 'letter' in English and is is the smallest part of a book and is indivisible. We may divide a book into
sentences and further divide the sentences into words, and again the words into syllables and then the syllables into
letters. The letters, then, are indivisible, for a letter has no meaning if it is divided in two. Each letter has three
properties: *nomen*, *figura*, *potestas*, that is 'name' and 'form' and 'function'. Name: what it is called (*a*, *b*,
*c*); form: how it is written; function: what power does it have when placed among other letters.

Furthermore in Latin there are twenty three letters: *a*, *b*, *c*, *d*, *e*, *f*, *g*, *h*, *i*, *k*, *l*, *m*, *n*,
*o*, *p*, *q*, *r*, *s*, *t*, *u*, *x*, *y*, *z*. Of those there are five *uocales*, or vowels, that are voiced: *a*,
*e*, *i*, *o*, *u*. Those five letters reveal their names through their own sound and without these letters no word may
be written and therefore they are called *quinque uocales*. To these is added the Greek *y* for use in Greek names and
this same letter is also very common in English. All of the other letters are called *consonates*, that is 'sounding
with', for they make sound only when combined with one of the five voiced letters. Some are found with the voiced
letters and are *semiuocales*, that is 'half-voiced'; some are *mutae*, that is 'silent'. There are seven *semiuocales*:
*f*, *l*, *m*, *n*, *r*, *s*, *x*. These are called half-voiced because they are not fully-voiced like the *quinque
uocales*. And six begin with the letter *e* and end with themselves; *x* alone begins with *i* according to the teaching
of scholars. The other nine *consonantes* are said to be *mutae*, that is 'silent'. They are not completely silent but
they have little sound. They are: *b*, *c*, *d*, *g*, *h*, *k*, *p*, *q*, *t*. These begin with themselves and end with
their voiced letter: *b*, *c*, *d*, *g*, *p*, *t* end with *e*; *h* and *k* end with *a* if spoken properly; *q* ends
with *u*. Finally *z*, a Greek letter, end with *a*; the letter is borrowed from Green into Latin for use with Greek
words. *I* and *u* are considered *consonates* when placed together or when combined with other vowels. If you were to
now say *iudex*, you find the *i consonans*. If you were to say *uir*, you find the *u consonans*. *Ianua*: here is the
*i consonans*; *uatis*: here is the *u consonans*. These two letters also have more functions than we will say here.
In addition, we might discuss the various other ways to pronounce these letters if it were appropriate for English.

Incipit de verbo
----------------

*Verbum est pars orationis cum tempore et persona sine casu aut agere aliquit aut pati aut neutrum significans*: 'a
*verbum* is a word which is part of Latin with time and person without case, signifying either the doing of somthing or
the enduring of something or neither'. *Verbum habet septum accidentia*: 'a verb has seven things which belong to it'.
It has *significatio*, that is 'meaning', what that word means: a deed, a thing to be endured or neither; *tempus*
'time', *modus* 'mood', *species* 'function', *figura* 'form', *coniugatio*, 'conjugation', *persona* 'person',
*numerus* 'number'. We shall now in order carefully consider each of these.

    **At this point Ælfric expounds at length about the grammar of Latin verbs.**
